# MLUT project #
Project template for development with [MLUT](https://github.com/mr150/mlut).

## System requirements ##
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/)
- Git Bash - for Windows users.

## Installation ##
```bash
git clone https://github.com/mr150/mlut-project.git
cd mlut-project
npm i
```

## Build the project ##
For building and automation uses the [Gulp](https://github.com/gulpjs/gulp) task runner.

### Basic commands ###
Enter the following commands in your terminal.

#### Dev server ####
To start development server with livereload, run gulp watcher:
```
npm run gulp
```
or add path to `gulp` in environment variable `PATH`
```bash
export PATH=./node_modules/.bin:$PATH
```
and run gulp easier
```
gulp
```
server start in `src/` folder by default and your `src/index.html` will be on `localhost:3000`.

To stop dev server press `Ctrl + c` in your terminal.

For all other basic commands, the name of the npm scripts coincides with the name of the gulp tasks.

#### Build ####
To build project without watcher, execute:
```
gulp build
```
also you can only compile files without a complete build:
```
gulp compile
```
All code for production are in `dist/` folder.

#### Minify images ####
```
gulp imgmin
```
You can minify images with `build` task too.

#### Upload to ftp ####
First you need to specify some data in the `gulpfile.js`:
- `dirs.ftp` - project folder on the server
- `ftpConfig` - hostname, username, etc

and then:
```
gulp ftp
```

#### Create svg sprite ####
```
gulp svg-sprite
```
Gulp collects all the svg files from the `src/img/assets` into the sprite. The sprite is placed in `src/img` and has the name `sprite.svg`. Symbols ids are set according to the scheme: "icon-`filename`".

### Code ###
For writing HTML by default is used [Pug](https://github.com/pugjs/pug) template engine. Files from `src/pug/` will be compiled to HTML in `src/` except those in the sub folders. `src/pug/includes/` contains fragments for reuse on different pages. In `src/pug/tools/` you can find variables with templates for data, useful functions and mixins. If you don't want use pug, delete `src/pug/` folder from the project.

For HTML validation, a [gulp-w3c-html-validation](https://github.com/Aakash-Goel/gulp-w3c-html-validation) is used. It creates a file with the result of the check in the `logs/` directory. I do not know how to disable this report so the `logs/` is simply ignored by git.

For writing styles is used [LibSass](https://github.com/sass/libsass) (SCSS syntax).

All styles files from `src/sass/` will be compiled to CSS. To store fragments, use the `src/sass/includes` folder and import them in the main file:
```scss
@import "includes/my-block";
```

Scripts should be written or included in `src/js/script.js`. To store parts of scripts use `src/js/includes/` directory. You can include code via `gulp-rigger`:
```js
//= includes/block.js
```

All styles from `src/sass/**/*` will be linted by [Stylelint](https://github.com/stylelint/stylelint). CSS properties order is linted according to [rational order](https://github.com/constverum/stylelint-config-rational-order) but not so strict.

In the process of assembling styles, the [purgecss](https://github.com/FullHuman/purgecss) is used. If the CSS class is not used in HTML or JS, it will be deleted from assembled CSS file.

For store third party libs use `src/libs/` directory. Files from this directory is not linted. Also they is ignored by git except for `mlut.*` files.

### Configs ###
Files in which you can find configs:

- `gulpfile.js` - project assembly
- `package.json` - npm scripts and package info
- `.stylelintrc` - Stylelint rules
- `.browserslistrc` - list of browsers for which vendor prefixes are generated by [Autoprefixer](https://github.com/postcss/autoprefixer)
- `src/sass/tools/_settings.scss` - MLUT styles settings and compilation flags

### Assets ###
Images put in `src/img/` directory. All images from there will be minified except for those in the `src/img/assets/`. This directory is needed to store additional files like a parts of sprites. By default it ignored by git.

By default, [guetzli](https://github.com/google/guetzli) with [mozjpeg](https://github.com/mozilla/mozjpeg) is used for jpg images minification. Guetzli consumes a lot of CPU and RAM, and also works slowly. If you have a weak computer or you don't want to wait, then turn it off in the `gulpfile.js`. By default for guetzli is set a limit on RAM consumption of 1GB.

Web fonts put in `src/fonts/`.

All assets for production also are in `dist/` folder.

## Work with MLUT ##
There are 2 ways to start using MLUT:

- assembled dist
- developer toolkit

### Dist ###
You can link assembled MLUT files to page. For get all dist, enter:
```
npm run mlut-dist
```
If you want to link only CSS, execute:
```
npm run mlut-dist-css
```
and for JS
```
npm run mlut-dist-js
```
or similarly for get CSS file with `scss` extension, if you want include it to `style.scss`
```
npm run mlut-dist-scss
```
All scripts put files in `src/libs/` directory.

Then link files to your page:
``` html
<link href="libs/mlut.min.css" rel="stylesheet">
<script src="libs/mlut.min.js"></script>
```
or import SCSS to `style.scss`
``` scss
@import "../libs/mlut.min";
```
And just add MLUT classes to markup:
``` html
<div class="row D-f">
	<div class="row__col W3c_md">
		<h3>Simple text</h3>
```

### Toolkit ###
You can get MLUT sources for using full toolkit: sass mixins, functions, utilities etc. Also you can create custom bundle, themes etc.

For get sources:
```
npm run mlut-src
```
After that sources appear in `src/` folder.

#### Styles ####
To get started, uncomment imports of sass settings and tools in `src/sass/style.scss`:
``` scss
@import "tools/settings";
@import "tools/functions";
@import "tools/mixins";
```
Then you can import blocks, utilities and use sass tools:
```scss
@import "core/blocks/wrapper";
@import "core/utils/display";

@include mlu-bpm("md") {
	.inp--common {
		padding: mlu-px2em(16px) 16px;
	}
}
```
You can import only files that you want and build custom bundle or redefine existing with new settings.

After execution `mlut-src` in `src/sass/` will appear `mlut.scss` which contains imports for build default bundle. If you want use it execute:
```
npm run mlut-scss
```
This write content `mlut.scss` to `src/sass/style.scss` and delete `mlut.scss`.

#### Scripts ####
To use MLUT scripts, import them via `gulp-rigger`:
```js
//= core/init.js
```
Similarly with styles, after `mlut-src` in `src/js/` will appear `mlut.js` with imports for default bundle. To use it:
```
npm run mlut-js
```
works similarly with `mlut-scss`.

By default all MLUT sources written in `.gitignore`.
